>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, DECEMBER 28:
A COMMERCIAL AIRLINER CARRYING
162 PEOPLE VANISHES IN SOUTHEAST
ASIA.
WE'LL HAVE THE LATEST ON THE
SEARCH.
>> WE DON'T KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
YET, SO WE'LL WAIT FOR THE
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CHRISTMAS
SHOPPING SEASON DRAWS TO A
CLOSE.
HOW DID RETAILERS ACROSS THE
NATION DO?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
PEOPLE BEING SENT TO JAIL
BECAUSE THEY CAN'T PAY FINES.
MANY EXPERTS BELIEVE IT'S
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
>> BEING THREATENED WITH A JAIL
SENTENCE, DID THAT HELP YOU TO
COME UP WITH THE MONEY?
>> IT HELPED ME TO TRY A LITTLE
HARDER, BUT AS THE OLD SAYING
GOES, YOU KNOW YOU CAN'T SQUEEZE
BLOOD FROM A TURNIP.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT'S MONDAY MORNING IN ASIA AND
THE SEARCH FOR A MISSING AIRASIA
JETLINER CARRYING 162 PEOPLE IS
RESUMING.
THE AIRBUS DISAPPEARED FROM
RADAR SCREENS ABOUT 40 MINUTES
AFTER TAKING OFF FROM INDONESIA
ON ROUTE TO SINGAPORE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ZACHARY GREEN HAS
MORE ON THE INVESTIGATION.
>> Reporter: AT SINGAPORE'S
CHANGI AIRPORT, FRIENDS AND
RELATIVES GATHERED TO AWAIT NEWS
ABOUT AIRASIA FLIGHT 8501, WHICH
DISAPPEARED EARLY THIS MORNING.
AMONG THOSE WAITING, THE FIANCEE
OF A YOUNG MAN WHO HAD BEEN
TRAVELING WITH RELATIVES.
>> (translated): IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE THEIR LAST
VACATION, BEFORE US--WE GOT
MARRIED.
IT WAS TO BE HIS LAST VACATION
WITH HIS FAMILY.
>> Reporter: THE FLIGHT TOOK OFF
AT 5:35 A.M. LOCAL TIME FROM
SURABAYA, INDONESIA'S SECOND-
LARGEST CITY.
THE SCHEDULED FLIGHT TIME TO
SINGAPORE WAS ONE HOUR AND 55
MINUTES.
BUT AT 6:13 AM, 38 MINUTES AFTER
TAKEOFF, THE PILOT RADIOED AIR
TRAFFIC CONTROL, ASKING TO
CHANGE COURSE AND INCREASE
ALTITUDE TO AVOID STORM CLOUDS.
THERE WERE REPORTS OF LIGHTNING
IN THE AREA.
THE FLIGHT WAS LAST SEEN ON
RADAR THREE MINUTES LATER AT
6:16 AM, NEAR BELITUNG ISLAND IN
THE JAVA SEA.
A MINUTE LATER, IT WAS GONE.
ACCORDING TO AN INDONESIAN
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIAL, NO
DISTRESS SIGNAL HAD BEEN SENT
OUT.
SEARCH AND RESCUE TEAMS FROM
INDONESIA, SINGAPORE, AND
MALAYSIA SPENT SEVERAL HOURS
SUNDAY SEARCHING FOR ANY SIGN OF
THE PLANE, AN AIRBUS A320.
BUT AS NIGHT FELL, OFFICIALS
HALTED THE SEARCH UNTIL MORNING.
THE UNITED STATES, THE UNITED
KINGDOM, AUSTRALIA, SOUTH KOREA,
AND INDIA HAVE ALL VOLUNTEERED
SEARCH AND RESCUE TEAMS.
>> (translated): I HEARD MANY
RUMORS FROM PEOPLE AND I SAID
THE RUMORS ARE NOT TRUE THAT THE
PLANE HAS BEEN FOUND AND
WRECKAGE HAS BEEN FOUND-- THIS
IS NOT TRUE.
>> Reporter: TONY FERNANDES,
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF AIRASIA, A
BUDGET CARRIER BASED IN
MALAYSIA, ALSO CAUTIONED AGAINST
SPECULATION.
>> WE DO NOT KNOW WHAT'S
HAPPENED YET, SO WE'LL WAIT FOR
THE ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION TO
REALLY FIND OUT WHAT'S HAPPENED.
OUR CONCERN RIGHT NOW IS FOR THE
RELATIVES AND FOR THE NEXT OF
KIN, THERE IS NOTHING MORE
IMPORTANT TO US FOR OUR CREW'S
FAMILY, AND FOR OUR PASSENGERS'
FAMILIES, THAT WE LOOK AFTER
THEM.
>> Reporter: AIRASIA HAS HAD A
CLEAN SAFETY RECORD SINCE THE
COMPANY BEGAN OPERATING IN
MALAYSIA 13 YEARS AGO.
THE PLANE THAT WENT MISSING HAD
UNDERGONE MAINTENANCE JUST A
MONTH BEFORE.
LAST MARCH, MALAYSIA AIRLINES
FLIGHT 370 DISAPPEARED WITH 239
PEOPLE ABOARD, ON ROUTE FROM
KUALA LUMPUR TO BEIJING.
IT'S NEVER BEEN FOUND.
IN JULY, MALAYSIA AIRLINES
FLIGHT 17 WAS SHOT DOWN OVER
EASTERN UKRAINE, KILLING ALL 298
PEOPLE ON BOARD.
>> Sreenivasan: A FERRY CARRYING
NEARLY 500 PASSENGERS AND CREW
IS ON FIRE IN THE ADRIATIC SEA
AND A RESCUE MISSION IS
UNDERWAY.
ITALIAN AND GREEK HELICOPTER
CREWS ARE AIRLIFTING PASSENGERS
OFF THE VESSEL, DESPITE HEAVY
RAIN AND STRONG WINDS IN THE
AREA.
A GREEK GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL SAID
ONE MAN WAS CONFIRMED DEAD.
THE INTERNATIONAL COMBAT MISSION
IN AFGHANISTAN FORMALLY ENDED
TODAY, MORE THAN 13 YEARS AFTER
IT BEGAN IN THE AFTERMATH OF
9/11.
SUNDAY'S CEREMONY PUTS AFGHAN
FORCES OFFICIALLY IN CHARGE OF
THE ONGOING BATTLE AGAINST THE
TALIBAN.
EVEN SO, NEARLY 11,000 AMERICAN
MILITARY PERSONNEL WILL REMAIN
TO ASSIST THE AFGHAN ARMY AND
POLICE.
MORE THAN 2,000 AMERICANS HAVE
DIED IN THE CONFLICT.
ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS
REPORTEDLY HAVE KILLED NEARLY 12
HUNDRED SYRIAN CIVILIANS DURING
THE PAST SIX MONTHS.
THIS ACCORDING TO THE SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
THE GROUP SAYS ISIS ALSO HAS
KILLED 120 OF ITS OWN MEMBERS,
MOST OF THEM FOREIGN FIGHTERS
WHO WERE SEEKING TO RETURN HOME.
U.S.-LED AIRSTRIKES CONTINUED
AGAINST ISIS TARGETS IN SYRIA
AND IRAQ TODAY.
IN A TELEVISION INTERVIEW TODAY,
THE U.S. EBOLA RESPONSE
COORDINATOR OFFERED AN UPDATE
ABOUT THE FIGHT AGAINST THE
DISEASE.
>> I THINK YOU HAVE TO SEPARATE
WHERE WE HERE AT HOME FROM WEST
AFRICA.
HERE AT HOME WE HAVE MADE
SIGNIFICANT STRIDES TO PREPARE
FOR THE OCCASIONAL CASE OF EBOLA
THAT WE'LL SEE FROM TIME TO TIME
ON OUR SHORES.
AND IN WEST AFRICA THERE'S A LOT
OF PROGRESS IN LIBERIA AND
THEY'VE GONE FROM 50-TO-100 NEW
CASES A DAY TO DOWN TO FIVE-TO-
TEN NEW CASES A DAY, BUT THERE'S
STILL A LOT OF WORK TO BE DONE
IN SIERRA LEONE AND TROUBLING
SIGNS IN GUINEA.
SO I THINK WE'RE NEARING A PIVOT
POINT IN THIS WHERE THE NUMBER
OF NEW CASES OVER IN WEST AFRICA
HAVE STABILIZED BUT THIS WON'T
BE DONE UNTIL WE GET ALL THE WAY
TO ZERO.
IT'S LIKE A FOREST FIRE, A FEW
EMBERS BURNING AND THE THING CAN
REIGNITE ANY TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: AND DOCTORS IN
HOUSTON SAY FORMER PRESIDENT
GEORGE H.W. BUSH'S CONDITION IS
IMPROVING.
HE WAS TAKEN BY AMBULANCE TO THE
HOSPITAL TUESDAY AFTER
COMPLAINING OF SHORTNESS OF
BREATH.
THE FORMER PRESIDENT IS 90-
YEARS-OLD.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL,
IN-DEPTH REPORTS ABOUT
SIGNIFICANT BUT OFTEN UNDER-
REPORTED STORIES.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO ALABAMA,
WHERE CIVIL RIGHTS ADVOCATES SAY
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
JAILED BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T
AFFORD TO PAY THEIR FINES.
CRITICS SAY THE PRACTICE IS
TANTAMOUNT TO THE RESTORATION OF
DEBTORS' PRISONS, WHICH WERE
OUTLAWED IN THE 1830'S.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FRAY HAS AN UPDATED
VERSION OF OUR REPORT, WHICH
FIRST AIRED IN APRIL.
♪
>> Reporter: TIMOTHY FUGATT, THE
MINISTER OF MUSIC AT THIS CHURCH
NEAR CHILDERSBURG, ALABAMA, SAYS
THAT IT'S HIS DEEP FAITH IN GOD
THAT GOT HIM THROUGH SOME TOUGH
TIMES.
HIS SON, COLE, WAS BORN WITH A
RARE BRAIN DISEASE.
>> THE SPHERES IN HIS BRAIN
DIDN'T DIVIDE PROPERLY.
SO PRETTY MUCH WHEN YOU LOOK
THROUGH A C.T. SCAN, IT WAS
NOTHING BUT FLUID.
>> Reporter: BUT LIFE GOT EVEN
TOUGHER AFTER A SEEMINGLY MINOR
INCIDENT IN DECEMBER OF 2010
WHEN HE WAS PULLED OVER BY
POLICE AND TICKETED FOR AN
EXPIRED LICENSE PLATE TAG.
>> I WAS COMING FROM THE
HOSPITAL WHERE HAD BEEN STAYING
WITH COLE THERE IN THE HOSPITAL.
AND AS I COME INTO TOWN, THEY
HAD A TRAFFIC CHECKPOINT.
TIMOTHY'S WIFE, KRISTY, HAD ALSO
GOTTEN TICKETS FOR TWO TRAFFIC
INFRACTIONS AND BOTH WERE
ORDERED TO APPEAR IN THE
CHILDERSBURG MUNICIPAL COURT.
THE FUGATTS TOLD THE JUDGE ABOUT
THEIR HOSPITALIZED SON AND WERE
BOTH FOUND "NOT GUILTY", AS
THESE COURT DOCUMENTS SHOW.
BUT THE JUDGE RULED THAT THE TWO
STILL HAD TO PAY COURT COSTS OF
ABOUT $500.
DURING THIS PERIOD, TIMOTHY
FUGATT SAYS HE WAS SPENDING SO
MUCH TIME AT THE HOSPITAL WITH
HIS SON THAT HE COULDN'T HOLD
DOWN A JOB, AND WITH HIS WIFE
ALSO NOT WORKING, THEY COULDN'T
AFFORD TO PAY THE COURT COSTS.
SO THEIR CASE WAS TURNED OVER TO
JUDICIAL CORRECTIONS SERVICES, A
PRIVATE COMPANY THAT COLLECTS
FINES FOR THE CITY.
FUGATT SAYS THAT JUDICIAL
CORRECTIONS SERVICES, KNOWN AS
J.C.S., TOLD HIM THAT HE AND HIS
WIFE COULD BE JAILED IF THEY
DIDN'T PAY WHAT THEY OWED.
>> THEY WOULD JUST PLAIN OUT
SAY, YOU KNOW, "IF YOU CAN'T PAY
THEN THEY'LL ISSUE YOU A WARRANT
FOR YOUR ARREST."
>> Reporter: DID THAT SCARE YOU?
>> OF COURSE.
>> Reporter: FUGATT SAYS HE DID
THE BEST HE COULD TO PAY OFF HIS
FAMILY'S FINES, BUT SAYS WHEN HE
COULDN'T CONTINUE TO PAY AND HE
AND HIS WIFE MISSED AT LEAST ONE
COURT DATE, THEY WERE ARRESTED
AND JAILED.
>> I FELT COMPLETELY LIKE A
CRIMINAL.
I MEAN I DIDN'T SELL DRUGS.
I DIDN'T BREAK INTO ANYONE'S
HOME.
I DIDN'T KILL ANYBODY.
I HAD AN EXPIRED TAG.
>> Reporter: SO YOU AND YOUR
WIFE WERE FOUND NOT GUILTY OF
THE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS, BUT
STILL YOU WERE BEING ARRESTED.
>> WE WERE BEING ARRESTED, YES.
I WAS VERY UPSET, VERY ANGRY.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE RELEASED
SEVERAL HOURS LATER WHEN A
RELATIVE PAID A PORTION OF WHAT
THEY OWED.
THAT INCIDENT CONTRIBUTED TO THE
FUGATTS' DECISION TO BECOME PART
OF A LAWSUIT AGAINST JUDICIAL
CORRECTIONS SERVICES AND THE
TOWN OF CHILDERSBURG.
THE SUIT ALLEGES THAT
INCARCERATING PEOPLE WHO CAN'T
PAY THEIR FINES VIOLATES THE
CONSTITUTION.
THOUGH SOME EXPERTS ARGUE THAT
JAIL TIME IS LEGAL FOR THOSE WHO
DON'T MAKE A GOOD FAITH EFFORT
TO PAY THEIR FINES, IN 1971 THE
SUPREME COURT RULED THAT THE
CONSTITUTION PROHIBITS IMPOSING
"A JAIL TERM SOLELY BECAUSE THE
DEFENDANT IS INDIGENT AND CANNOT
FORTHWITH PAY THE FINE IN FULL."
>> THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT'S
HAPPENING HERE.
>> Reporter: DAVID DINELLI IS
THE DEPUTY LEGAL DIRECTORY OF
THE SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER,
A NON-PROFIT CIVIL RIGHTS
ORGANIZATION THAT IS NOT
INVOLVED IN THE FUGATTS' LAWSUIT
BUT HAS REPRESENTED OTHERS IN
SIMILAR SITUATIONS.
DINELLI ESTIMATES A 1,000 PEOPLE
EVERY MONTH ARE GOING TO JAIL IN
ALABAMA BECAUSE THEY CANNOT
AFFORD TO PAY A FINE.
>> EVERYONE THINKS THAT DEBTOR'S
PRISON IS OVER.
IT'S BEHIND US.
IT ISN'T.
AS A MATTER OF PRACTICE, AND IN
SOME CASES, POLICY, THE COURTS
ASK ONE QUESTION, "CAN YOU PAY
THE FINE?"
IF YOU CAN'T THEN YOU HAVE TO
WHAT'S CALLED, "SIT IT OUT IN
JAIL."
THAT IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL UNLESS
THE COURT FIRST CONDUCTS AN
INQUIRY INTO WHETHER THEY'RE
INDIGENT AND THE CAUSES FOR
THEIR INABILITY TO PAY THE FINE.
ROUTINELY WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE
IS THAT NO SUCH INQUIRY IS
UNDERTAKEN.
>> DID ANYONE IN THE COURT EVERY
TRY AND ASSESS WHETHER OR NOT
YOU COULD AFFORD THE PAY THE
FEES?
>> NO, SIR.
IT WAS JUST PASS AND GO.
IT WAS REALLY FAST.
>> Reporter: COLLECTING FINES IS
MORE IMPORTANT THAN EVER BECAUSE
MANY CITIES FACE BUDGET
SHORTFALLS.
BUT THESE SAME CITIES DON'T HAVE
THE PERSONNEL TO COLLECT THE
FINES.
SO INCREASINGLY THEY TURN TO
WHAT ARE KNOWN AS PRIVATE
PROBATION COMPANIES.
THAT'S WHERE JUDICIAL
CORRECTIONS SERVICES COMES IN.
>> WE WERE APPROACHED BY THE
PROBATION SERVICE.
THEY FOUND A NICHE.
>> Reporter: CHILDERSBURG
OFFICIALS DECLINED TO SPEAK WITH
US, SO WE MET WITH STEVEN BOONE,
THE FINANCE DIRECTOR FOR
MOUNTAIN BROOK, A CITY
NEIGHBORING CHILDERSBURG THAT
ALSO HIRED JUDICIAL CORRECTION
SERVICES.
ITS COURT IS ONE OF OVER A
1,000, IN AT LEAST 12 STATES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, THAT'S HIRED
A PRIVATE PROBATION COMPANY,
ACCORDING TO HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH.
JUDICIAL CORRECTION SERVICES
COLLECTS FINES AT NO COST TO THE
CITIES IT WORKS FOR.
>> THEY'RE HELPING US TO BECOME
MORE EFFICIENT, AND THEY'RE
HELPING US TO ENSURE THAT WE
DON'T GET A BACKLOG OF
DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS THAT MAY
ULTIMATELY GET SO OLD AND PEOPLE
MOVE AWAY THAT WE'LL NEVER
COLLECT IT.
SO IT'S-- I THINK IT'S A
WIN/WIN.
>> I THINK PRIVATE PROBATION HAS
A ROLE.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN STATE
SENATOR CAM WARD IS THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE AND
HAS BEEN FOLLOWING THE GROWING
TREND OF PRIVATE PROBATION.
NOT ONLY DOES WARD SUPPORT THE
USE OF SUCH COMPANIES, HE
BELIEVES THE INDUSTRY WILL
CONTINUE TO GROW.
>> NOW, I WILL TELL YOU THIS, I
THINK THE TREND TO PRIVATIZATION
IN THE AREA OF COLLECTIONS, I
9THINK THAT WILL CONTINUE ALL
ACROSS THE COUNTRY UNTIL YOU SEE
A CONCENTRATED EFFORT TO PUT
MORE MONEY INTO THE COLLECTION
SERVICES THAT THE STATE RUNS.
>> Reporter: BUT THESE PRIVATE
DEBT COLLECTORS ARE BY
DEFINITION IN BUSINESS TO MAKE
MONEY.
AND EVEN THOUGH THEY DON'T
CHARGE THE CITY ANYTHING, THEY
CHARGE OFFENDERS, LIKE TIMOTHY
FUGATT, $45 A MONTH PLUS A $10
START-UP FEE, UNTIL A DEBT IS
FULLY PAID OFF.
THIS ON TOP OF THE $500 IN COURT
COSTS THAT FUGATT ALREADY OWED.
CAN YOU TELL ME IF YOU WERE
MAKING AN EFFORT TO PAY THESE
OFF?
>> WE WERE.
YES, SIR.
EVEN THOUGH, YOU KNOW, I WAS
MAKING THE EFFORT, I WASN'T
GETTING VERY FAR WITH IT.
IT WAS-- IT WAS TILL ALL THESE
FEES ADDING UP.
SO I WASN'T GAINING MUCH GROUND.
>> Reporter: STILL, FOUR MONTHS
AFTER THEIR INITIAL COURT DATE,
DOCUMENTS SHOW THAT THE FUGATTS'
SCRAPED TOGETHER ENOUGH TO PAY
OFF ALMOST $300 OF THE $500 THEY
OWED IN COURT COSTS.
♪
BUT THEN THINGS WENT FROM BAD TO
WORSE.
IN JUNE OF 2011, THEIR SON,
COLE, DIED.
A MONTH LATER THEIR HOUSE THAT
HAD BEEN IN THE FAMILY FOR
GENERATIONS WAS FORECLOSED UPON.
AT THIS POINT THE FUGATTS SAY
THEY WERE CONSUMED WITH GRIEF
AND WERE MISSING THEIR
APPOINTMENTS WITH J.C.S.
TIMOTHY SAYS HE EXPLAINED THE
DIFFICULT CIRCUMSTANCES HIS
FAMILY WAS UNDER, BUT HE SAYS
THE J.C.S. PROBATION OFFICER
WOULDN'T WORK WITH HIM AT ALL.
>> IT WAS ALL AT ONE TIME, JUST
HIT US ALL AT ONCE.
AND I EXPLAINED IT ALL TO THEM.
BUT WE-- YOU KNOW, IT WAS EITHER
PAY OR GO TO JAIL.
>> BEING THREATENED WITH A JAIL
SENTENCE, DID THAT HELP YOU TO
COME UP WITH THE MONEY?
>> IT HELPED TO TRY A LITTLE
HARDER, BUT, YOU KNOW, STILL.
I MEAN, AS THE OLD SAYING GOES,
YOU KNOW, YOU CAN'T SQUEEZE
BLOOD FROM A TURNIP.
>> Reporter: OVER THE NEXT EIGHT
MONTHS WITH J.C.S. MONTHLY FEES
ADDING UP, THE COUPLE MISSED AT
LEAST ONE COURT DATE EACH AND
WERE FINED ADDITIONAL FEES FOR
FAILURE TO APPEAR.
THEN A WARRANT FOR THEIR ARREST
WAS ISSUED.
BY THE TIME OF THEIR ARREST IN
FEBRUARY OF 2012, THE FUGATTS
HAD RACKED UP $2,500 IN
ADDITIONAL COURT FINES.
REMEMBER ALL THIS BEGAN WITH
THREE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS FOR
WHICH THEY WERE FOUND NOT
GUILTY.
>> Reporter: IF YOU WOULD'VE
COME UP WITH THE MONEY THAT YOU
OWED JUDICIAL CORRECTION
SERVICES AND YOU WOULD'VE SHOWN
UP FOR ALL OF YOUR APPOINTMENTS
WITH THEM AND TO THE COURTS,
NONE OF THIS WOULD HAVE EVER
HAPPENED?
>> YOU'RE RIGHT.
IT WOULDN'T HAVE HAPPENED, BUT,
YOU KNOW, THE SITUATION I WAS
IN, I WAS DOING WHAT I COULD DO,
YOU KNOW?
I HAD A DYING CHILD, NO STEADY
JOB AT THAT POINT BECAUSE WE
WERE BACK AND FORTH TO THE
HOSPITAL, I WAS DOING WHAT I
COULD DO.
>> Reporter: DAVID DINELLI OF
THE SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER
SAYS THAT PEOPLE LIKE THE
FUGATTS END UP PAYING J.C.S. OFF
FOR YEARS BECAUSE OF ALL THE
ADDITIONAL FEES AND ADDED FINES
THAT THEY OFTEN ACCRUE.
>> THEY'RE IN A SYSTEM IN WHICH
ALL THEY ARE DOING IS PAYING
J.C.S., JUDICIAL COLLECTION
SERVICES ON A MONTHLY BASIS FOR
THE PRIVILEGE OF STAYING OUT OF
JAIL.
>> Reporter: WE ASKED LEGAL
SCHOLAR AND COLUMBIA LAW
PROFESSOR GILLIAN METZGER TO
TAKE A LOOK AT THE LAWSUIT AND
TO EVALUATE THE
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF PRIVATE
COMPANIES, LIKE JUDICIAL
CORRECTION SERVICES, COLLECTING
FINES FOR CITIES LIKE
CHILDERSBURG.
SHE HAS NO INVOLVEMENT IN THE
CASE.
>> PART OF WHAT DUE PROCESS
REQUIRES IS THAT YOU HAVE AN
IMPARTIAL DECISION MAKER.
AND IF THE COMPANY THAT IS
IMPOSING THE FEES AND CONTINUING
YOUR SUPERVISION HAS A FINANCIAL
INTEREST IN YOUR STAYING UNDER
SUPERVISION, THEN THAT REALLY
CALLS THEIR IMPARTIALITY INTO
QUESTION.
AND THEY HAVE A FINANCIAL
MOTIVE.
>> Reporter: METZGER ALSO SAYS
THE COURT IS OBLIGATED TO
PROVIDE ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS FOR
AN INDIVIDUAL TO PAY OFF A DEBT
TO SOCIETY, SUCH AS COMMUNITY
SERVICE, IF HE OR SHE IS
INDIGENT.
>> IF YOU'RE NOT PAYING BECAUSE
YOU'RE JUST TOO POOR TO PAY,
THEN THE COURT CAN'T
AUTOMATICALLY IMPRISON YOU.
THEY HAVE TO DO AN INVESTIGATION
ABOUT ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
IN ORDER TO ALLOW YOU TO WORK
OFF THE FINE IN SOME OTHER WAY.
>> Reporter: WE REACHED OUT TO
J.C.S. MULTIPLE TIMES FOR AN
INTERVIEW, BUT WE NEVER RECEIVED
A REPLY.
BUT ON ITS WEBSITE J.C.S. SAYS
THE LAWSUIT IS BASELESS.
WE ALSO TRIED UNSUCCESSFULLY
SEVERAL TIMES TO ASK THE MAYOR
OF CHILDERSBURG, "B.J." MEEKS,
IF HE WAS SATISFIED WITH THE
SERVICES J.C.S. HAS BEEN
PROVIDING THE CITY, BUT CITY
HALL NEVER RESPONDED TO OUR
REQUEST.
SO WE WENT TO A CITY COUNCIL
MEETING TO ASK.
AFTER SPEAKING TO SOME OF THE
RESIDENTS HERE, THEY FEEL LIKE
THEY'VE BEEN THREATENED WITH A
JAIL SENTENCE IF THEY DON'T PAY
THEIR FINES AND I WONDER IF YOU
HAD A COMMENT.
>> WELL, THEN THAT'S UP TO THE
COURT SYSTEM.
IS, YOU KNOW...
>> Reporter: I MEAN, IS IT NOT
UNCONSTITUTIONAL TO JAIL
SOMEBODY WHO CANNOT PAY THEIR
FEE?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
AGAIN, IF THE COURT SYSTEM IS
SATISFIED WITH IT UNDER STATE
SUPREME COURT JURISDICTION, I
KNOW THAT WE CONTRACT, WE ARE
ONE OF THE MANY, MANY CITIES IN
ALABAMA THAT USES CONTRACT
SERVICE, AND THE REASON BEING
BECAUSE OF NOT HAVING ENOUGH
PERSONNEL, WE HAVE.
>> Reporter: EVEN STATE SENATOR
CAM WARD, WHO SUPPORTS THE
PRIVATE PROBATION INDUSTRY, HAS
CONCERNS.
>> WHAT'S CURRENTLY IN EXISTENCE
IS ALMOST LIKE THE WILD WEST.
THERE IS NO REGULATION.
IF YOU'RE GONNA CREATE A SYSTEM
THAT IS A "DEBTORS PRISON," ALL
YOU'RE DOING IS INVITING
YOURSELF TO A FEDERAL LAWSUIT,
IS WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
>> Reporter: AS FOR THE FUGATTS,
AFTER BEING CHARGED AN INITIAL
COURT COST OF ABOUT $500 FOR
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS OF WHICH THEY
WERE FOUND NOT GUILTY.
COURT DOCUMENTS PROVIDED BY THE
FUGATTS' LAWYERS SHOW THAT
THEY'VE PAID ALMOST $1,300 TO
THE CHILDERSBURG COURT.
IT'S A NUMBER THAT DOESN'T EVEN
INCLUDE ALL THE ADDITIONAL
MONTHLY FEES THEY PAID TO
JUDICIAL CORRECTION SERVICES.
A FIGURE THE CITY OF
CHILDERSBURG DECLINED TO PROVIDE
US DUE TO PENDING LITIGATION.
>> Reporter: TIMOTHY FUGATT SAYS
THAT HIS FAMILY STILL OWES MORE
MONEY TO JUDICIAL CORRECTIONS
SERVICES.
HOW MUCH?
HE'S NOT SURE.
HE SAYS J.C.S. STOPPED
CONTACTING HIM AFTER THE LAWSUIT
WAS FILED.
WHILE THE FUGATT'S CASE IS STILL
PENDING, SINCE OUR STORY AIRED
LAST SPRING THE CHILDERSBURG
MUNICIPAL COURT RECENTLY ISSUED
A STANDING ORDER STATING THAT
"IN NO CASE SHALL AN INDIGENT
DEFENDANT BE INCARCERATED BASED
SOLELY ON HIS OR HER INABILITY
TO PAY FINES."
FUGATT'S ATTORNEY ALSO TOLD
NEWSHOUR THAT HUNDREDS OF
CHILDERSBURG RESIDENTS NO LONGER
HAVE WARRANTS OUT FOR THEIR
ARREST AND HAVE BEEN TAKEN OFF
JUDICIAL CORRECTIONS SERVICES
ROSTER.
IN A STATEMENT TO NEWSHOUR THE
CITY OF CHILDERSBURG SAYS IT IS
"PLEASED WITH THE ACTIONS TAKEN
TO TRANSFORM THE COURT, WHICH
WAS THE SUBJECT OF SOME NEGATIVE
PRESS ATTENTION, INTO A MODEL
FOR OTHER COURTS TO FOLLOW.
AND CHILDERSBURG IS NOT ALONE.
THE CITY OF MONTGOMERY, THAT
ALSO HIRED JUDICIAL CORRECTION
SERVICES, HAS AGREED TO NEW
POLICIES TO AVOID JAILING PEOPLE
WHO ARE TOO POOR TO PAY MINOR
FINES.
IN NOVEMBER, A FEDERAL COURT
APPROVED A SETTLEMENT FOR
PLAINTIFFS WHO WERE SUING THE
CITY, ALLEGING THEY WERE
UNLAWFULLY JAILED.
THE SETTLEMENT REQUIRES
MONTGOMERY TO STOP CONTRACTING
WITH JUDICIAL CORRECTION
SERVICES.
>> Sreenivasan: SHOULD PEOPLE
WITH OUTSTANDING COURT FINES END
UP BEHIND BARS?
JOIN THE DEBATE ON OUR FACEBOOK
PAGE.
VISIT facebook.com/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: EVER SINCE OIL
PRICES STARTED PLUNGING, WE'VE
HEARD EXPERTS PREDICT THAT
CONSUMERS WOULD USE THE MONEY
THEY'RE SAVING ON GAS TO SPEND
MORE ON CHRISTMAS GIFTS.
DID IT TURN OUT THAT WAY?
FOR MORE ABOUT THE CHRISTMAS
SHOPPING SEASON, WE ARE JOINED
NOW VIA SKYPE FROM ALBANY, NEW
YORK BY SARA GERMANO OF "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL."
SO CONSIDERING WE HAVE A
COUPLE OF DAYS LEFT IN THE
CALENDAR YEAR BUT REALLY THE
RETAIL SEASON STARTS AROUND
THANKSGIVING, HOW DID WE DO
SO FAR?
>> SO FAR, SO GOOD.
WE ARE REALLY STARTING TO
SEE THE RESULTS INTO JANUARY
AND ONCE THE GOVERNMENT
REPORTS ITS SPENDING DATA
AND SOME OF THE LARGEST
RETAILERS REPORT THEIR
QUARTERLY EARNINGS-- EARNINGS.
BUT EARLY INDICATIONS SHOW
THAT SO FAR CHRISTMAS
SHOPPERS, HOLIDAY SHOPPERS
WERE COMING OUT IN FOR ITS
THIS SEASON AND SPENDING A
LITTLE BIT MORE THAN THEY
HAVE IN SEASON'S PAST.
>> SO HOW MUCH OF THIS IS
RELATED TO KIND OF AN
INCREASED CONSUMER
CONFIDENCE COMBINED WITH
THAT DECREASE IN GAS PRICES
THAT WE TALKED ABOUT?
>> YEAH.
EVERYONE LOVES TO TALK ABOUT
THE GAS PRICES.
THEY'VE BEEN DOWN.
THEY'RE NOW DOWN BELOW $2 IN
SOME STATES.
AND THAT'S PUTTING ABOUT
$450 MILLION A DAY INTO
AMERICAN'S POCKETS.
YOU KNOW, CONSUMERS WE'VE
SPOKEN WITH HAVE SAID THAT
HAVING THAT EXTRA BIT TO
SPEND IS GOING A LONG WAY.
ALTHOUGH SOME CONSUMERS ARE
ALSO SAYING THEY'RE BEING A
LITTLE BIT MORE CAREFUL WITH
THAT EXTRA MONEY.
AND SOME OF IT IS GOING TO
SAVINGS.
SO WE'RE REALLY STARTING TO
TRY TO LOOK FOR HOW MUCH OF
THAT EXTRA CASH EARNED BY
FALLING GAS PRICES IS GOING
TO BE PUT BACK INTO THE
ECONOMY OR SAVED FOR SOME
OTHER DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THAT KIND OF STANDARD
QUESTION WE ASK, ARE THE
ON-LINE RETAILERS TAKING
BIGGER AND BIGGER CHUNKS OUT
OF THE BRICK AND MORTAR
PLAYERS OR IS IT A KIND OF
HEALTHY BALANCE NOW?
>> WELL, THE BIGGEST ISSUE
IN RETAIL RIGHT NOW IS
ACTUALLY FIGURING OUT, YOU
KNOW, WHO IS GOING TO WIN
ON-LINE SALES GROWTH.
AND IT A GAME THE BRICK AND
MORTAR RETAILERS ESPECIALLY
THE BIG BOX STORES LIKE
WAL-MART AND TARGET ARE
TRYING TO COMPETE MORE
EFFECTIVELY WITH THE
WEB-BASED RETAILERS LIKE
AMAZON AND eBAY.
THE LAST FEW YEARS YOU HAVE
SEEN DEFINITE STRIDES IN
THAT DIRECTION FROM THE
BRICK AND MORTAR RETAILERS.
JUST THIS YEAR WAL-MART SAID
THAT IT WOULD DO ON-LINE
PRICE MATCHING TO BETTER
COMPETE IN THAT AREA.
THE NEXT PIECE NOW THAT
CHRISTMAS IS OVER, THE NEXT
PHASE THIS COMPETITION WILL
SEE IS THE RETURNS.
LIKE ALL THOSE UGLY
CHRISTMAS SWEATERS THAT YOU
DIDN'T LIKE OR DIDN'T FIT,
THOSE ON-LINE SALES ARE
GOING TO BE SHIPPED BACK.
AND A LOT OF THE SHIPPING
COMPANIES LIKE FEDEX AND UPS
AND MAYBE EVEN THE U.S.
POSTAL SERVICE ARE BRACING
THEMSELVES FOR WHAT THEY
EXPECT TO BE A PRETTY HEAVY
RETURN SYSTEM, PARTICULARLY
FOR YEN LINE SALES.
>> AND WHAT ABOUT THE SHIFT
THAT WE'RE SEEING IN
RETAILERS HEADING TOWARDS
MOBILE.
EVEN SMALL BUSINESSES ARE
PUTTING OUT APPS NOW.
IS IT MAKING A BIG
DIFFERENCE.
ARE PEOPLE BUYING OR
SHOPPING ON THEIR CELL PHONES?
>> YEAH, AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT IS PART OF
THAT, YOU KNOW, SHIFT TO
ON-LINE SALES THAT EVEN THE
BRICK AND MORTAR RETAILERS
ARE TRYING TO GET BETTER AT.
A LOT OF EFFORT HAS GONE
INTO BUILDING BETTER MOBILE
APPS FOR SHOPPING.
YOU'RE SEEING A LOT OF WEB
ROOMING AND SHOWROOMING,
BUZZWORDS WE HAVE BEEN
HEARING OVER THE PAST FEW
MONTHS AND YEARS, PEOPLE
TRYING TO BE SAVIOR SHOPPERS,
KNOWING THE PRICES OF
WHATEVER IT IS THEY WANT TO
BUY, KNOWING WHERE THEY CAN
GET IT ON-LINE AND IN
STORES.
AND ALSO SEEING A BIT OF A
DECREASE IN IMPULSE SPENDING
TOO.
CONSUMERS ARE, BECAUSE OF
ALL THESE EFFORTS AND THE
RETAILERS TRYING TO GET
BETTER AT OFFERING THE BEST
PRICE, THE BEST EDUCATION,
THE BEST APPS, CUSTOMERS ARE
GOING TO BE SMARTER.
NOT LIKELY TO BUY OFF THE
TOP BECAUSE THEY ARE SO MUCH
MORE INFORMATION.
>> SARA GERMANO OF "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL," THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: CHURCH
ATTENDANCE NATURALLY SOARS
AROUND CHRISTMAS TIME, BUT
THAT'S NOT THE CASE IN ENGLAND
DURING THE REST OF THE YEAR.
IN FACT, MANY ANGLICAN CHURCHES
HAVE CLOSED IN RECENT YEARS AS
CONGREGATIONS HAVE WITHERED.
NOW, AN EFFORT IS UNDERWAY TO
PRESERVE SOME OF THESE HISTORIC
BUILDINGS BY USING THEM IN SOME
VERY UNCONVENTIONAL WAYS.
NULUFAR HEDAYAT REPORTS FROM
BRISTOL, ENGLAND.
>> IT'S SUNDAY MORNING AND
THAT COULD ONLY MEAN ONE
THING, IT'S TIME FOR THE
CIRCUS.
♪ TAKE ME TO CHURCH
>> ST. PAUL'S CHURCH WAS
STRUGGLING FOR YEARS WITH
DWINDLING CONGREGATIONS.
SO MUCH SO THAT IT FELL OUT
OF USE COMPLETELY.
>> THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
WANTED TO GET ST. PAUL'S
BACK INTO USE AND RESTORE IT
AS A HUB FOR THE COMMUNITY.
BUT THIS WOULD MEAN THAT IT
COULD NO LONGER JUST BE A
CHRISTIAN PLACE OF WORSHIP.
IT WOULD HAVE TO DIVERSIFY.
CUE-- MEDIA, A PERFORMERS
GROUP THAT CALL THIS CHURCH
THEIR HOME.
>> THE CHURCH'S CONSERVATION
TRUST ARE NOW RESPONSIBLE
FOR ST. PAUL'S.
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND HAS
350 SITES INTO THEIR CARE.
CHURCHES THAT WOULD
OTHERWISE BECOME APARTMENTS
OR DEMOLISHED.
THE DEAL IS THAT ALL
BUILDINGS REMAIN CONSECRATED
AND THEREFORE CAN READILY BE
TURNED BACK INTO A PLACE OF
WORSHIP.
>> WHAT WOULDN'T YOU HAVE IN
THE CHURCH.
>> OH THERE ARE PLENTY OF
THINGS WE WOULDN'T HAVE.
BUT CHURCH CORPORATION TRUST
THINKS THAT THIS IS AN
APPROPRIATE USE FOR THE
CHURCH.
ALL WE'VE DONE IS ADAPT AND
CONVERT THIS CHURCH INTO A
NEW USE.
AND THERE WILL ALWAYS BE
PEOPLE WHO WILL BE UNHAPPY
ABOUT THAT.
>> MY GRANDPARENTS ARE
VICARS SO I THINK THEY MAY
HAVE SOME ISSUES WITH IT.
I THINK THEY WOULD FEEL IT'S
NOT QUITE RIGHT BECAUSE THE
BUILDING HAS GREAT RELIGIOUS
IMPORTANCE FOR THEM.
>> SOME MAY VIEW WHAT THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IS DOING
AS IMPROPER.
BUT OTHERS ARE SAYING IT IS
A PRACTICAL WAY OF AT LEAST
HALTING THE DEMISE OF
HISTORICAL AND RELIGIOUSLY
IMPORTANT BUILDINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE
NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU
TONIGHT.
FIVE PEOPLE DIED AND 11 MORE
WERE INJURED AFTER AN EARLY
MORNING THREE-ALARM FIRE AT
A SENIOR LIVING APARTMENT
COMPLEX NEAR SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS.
A NEW CNN POLL SAYS JEB BUSH
AND CHRIS CHRISTIE ARE RUNNING
ONE, TWO AMONG PROSPECTIVE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES.
BUSH LEADS BY TEN POINTS.
HILLARY CLINTON HAS A WHOPPING
57 POINT ADVANTAGE OVER HER
CLOSEST POTENTIAL CHALLENGER,
MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR ELIZABETH
WARREN.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.